---
kindle-sync:
  bookId: '28104'
  title: >-
    ...and forgive them their debts: Lending, Foreclosure and Redemption From
    Bronze Age Finance to the Jubilee Year (THE TYRANNY OF DEBT Book 1)
  author: Michael Hudson
  asin: B07QGFZ7DW
  lastAnnotatedDate: '2021-04-16'
  bookImageUrl: 'https://m.media-amazon.com/images/I/91DbJr7yFqL._SY160.jpg'
  highlightsCount: 123
---
# ...and forgive them their debts
## Metadata
* Author: [Michael Hudson](https://www.amazon.com/Michael-Hudson/e/B00MBOX1FY/ref=dp_byline_cont_ebooks_1)
* ASIN: B07QGFZ7DW
* Reference: https://www.amazon.com/dp/B07QGFZ7DW
* [Kindle link](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW)

## Highlights
“Proclaim liberty throughout the land,” is inscribed on America’s Liberty Bell. That — location: [294](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=294) ^ref-58973

---
only subsistence landholdings were returned to their customary holders, not townhouses and other wealth over and above the basic subsistence needs of citizens. So the aim was not equality as such, but the assurance of self-support land and production for the citizenry. — location: [569](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=569) ^ref-10449

---
This tendency for debts to accrue faster than the economy can grow is missing from today’s academic curriculum. — location: [622](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=622) ^ref-26913

---
Instead of letting “the market” resolve matters in favor of foreclosing creditors, rulers saw that if cultivators had to work off their debts to private creditors, they would not be available to perform their public corvée work duties, not to mention fight in the army. — location: [690](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=690) ^ref-20825

---
“Land must not be sold in perpetuity, for the land belongs to me and you are only strangers and guests. You will allow a right of redemption on all your landed property, and restore it to its customary cultivators every fifty years” (Leviticus 25: 23–28). — location: [761](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=761) ^ref-33592

---
A Babylonian would be more open than most modern economists to recognizing the corrosive impact of debt. — location: [773](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=773) ^ref-6131

---
From the Biblical prophets to Roman Stoic historians a central theme was the accusation that what tore their society apart was the failure to cancel debts. — location: [776](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=776) ^ref-4542

---
Solon, who lay the groundwork for Athenian democracy by freeing the hektemoroi debt serfs and ending debt bondage in 594 BC. — location: [785](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=785) ^ref-7144

---
Mesopotamia’s takeoff could not have been sustained if its rulers had adopted today’s sanctity of debt. — location: [791](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=791) ^ref-8150

---
Jesus was both more revolutionary and more conservative than was earlier recognized. — location: [807](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=807) ^ref-61737

---
“You did not release [your people from their debts], so I will release sword, pestilence and famine!” (Jeremiah: 17–22). — location: [825](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=825) ^ref-51457

---
Isaiah 61: 1–2 — location: [834](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=834) ^ref-62842

---
The common denominator is to restore amity and equity in a celebratory setting. — location: [1008](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1008) ^ref-56258

---
“The assumption of conflict between these two spheres  [“public” and “private”] is a modern construct,” — location: [1085](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1085) ^ref-63636

---
The essence of any accounting system is that someone is reporting to a superior. Accounting is a tool of control, so hierarchy, oversight and centralized authority went together. — location: [1121](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1121) ^ref-48297

---
money was called into being to serve its basic functions of (1) account keeping as a common denominator of prices, (2) a common means of payment for settling debts, above all those owed to the large institutions at the end of each harvesting or trade cycle, and (3) a vehicle for saving and measuring economic gains. — location: [1136](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1136) ^ref-7003

---
the contrast between paying commercial interest out of mercantile gains and a “bite” taken by the creditor who “eats” the crop interest. — location: [1218](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1218) ^ref-57904

---
In Western Europe the papal Crusades in the 12th and 13th centuries looted enough silver and gold from Byzantium to revive commerce. — location: [1261](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1261) ^ref-40323

---
The ancient problem of usury is recurring on an economy-wide scale as our epoch limits bankruptcy to individual cases rather than with foresight and planning on a society-wide basis. — location: [1276](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1276) ^ref-22756

---
There is little leeway for disparities in income and wealth to develop, so self-seeking at the expense of others is discouraged. — location: [1442](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1442) ^ref-54355

---
acceptance of the moral premise that all debts should be paid – under rules drawn up by creditors – leads debtors in today’s world, including “anthropological” tribal communities, to willingly accept slavery, sexual exploitation and other degrading treatment. — location: [1603](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1603) ^ref-17695

---
the debtors who suffer injury, at the hands of creditors who now are victimizers, not victims as was the case when wergild claims arose from personal injury. — location: [1605](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1605) ^ref-10305

---
Maintaining the viability of the community took priority over claims by individual creditors. — location: [1699](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1699) ^ref-58032

---
Only late in antiquity did debt foreclosure and clientage lead to permanent deprivation of the means of self-support and personal liberty on a large scale. — location: [1701](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1701) ^ref-24996

---
Early debtors owing fines were not borrowers of money or individuals unable to pay public authorities, but offenders who owed restitution to their victims or to the community. The original seizure of collateral from debtors was to compel payment owed to the victims of crimes. The first recipients of these debt payments were the victims or families who had suffered injuries. — location: [1707](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1707) ^ref-56573

---
For communities self-sufficient in food and other basic necessities, economic exertion tapers off once subsistence needs are met.[100] — location: [1738](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1738) ^ref-61379

---
Interest is a regular and periodic financial return, stipulated in advance and computed as a standard proportion of the debt principal. — location: [1750](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1750) ^ref-7237

---
the central problem of usury. Interest is demanded on the basis of loans whose proceeds are not invested productively, or at least not at sufficient profit to pay the return demanded by creditors. — location: [1814](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1814) ^ref-36569

---
the economy-wide effect of usury is to enable creditors to draw society’s wealth into their own hands. — location: [1821](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1821) ^ref-44961

---
most civil wars in antiquity were debt revolts. — location: [1822](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1822) ^ref-9942

---
By the end of the 3rd millennium BC, borrowers are found pledging their labor service to creditors – one of the earliest stages in the evolution of wage labor. — location: [1856](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1856) ^ref-46475

---
debt was a deliberate device on the part of the creditor to obtain more dependent labour rather than a device for enrichment through interest.”[113] — location: [1863](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1863) ^ref-9688

---
Only at the end of antiquity, in the Roman era, did “freedom” for creditors from palace overrides lead to a loss of liberty for much of population. — location: [1875](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1875) ^ref-11977

---
The creditor oligarchy class ended up destroying the Republic in the ensuing century of Social War. — location: [1885](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1885) ^ref-25377

---
Today, entire nations are so deeply indebted that they are subjected to financial austerity and asset stripping, all in the name of free markets as if this means equity and stability. — location: [1888](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1888) ^ref-20610

---
Agrarian usury became a deepening wedge between rich and poor, leading to forfeitures and distress sales that created private property as our modern world knows it. Our modern legal philosophy endorses the expropriation of debtors’ property, not their security of property on terms that required creditors to absorb a loss when loans are too heavy to be paid. — location: [1893](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=1893) ^ref-51976

---
“Where communism decrees ‘None shall have property,’ Leviticus decrees ‘None shall lose property’; but both are against unhealthy latifundism.”[567] — location: [5587](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5587) ^ref-31818

---
communal safeguards against expropriation of the poor, not private appropriation. — location: [5589](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5589) ^ref-65343

---
“The land must not be sold permanently, because the land is mine and you are but aliens and my tenants. Throughout the country that you hold as a possession you must provide for the redemption (geʾullah, “ransom”) of the land.”[568] — location: [5591](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5591) ^ref-39701

---
Land alienated under economic duress (the usual motive for sale or forfeiture) was thus to be redeemed as rapidly as possible. — location: [5603](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5603) ^ref-8813

---
If one of your countrymen becomes poor and is unable to support himself among you, help him as you would an alien or a temporary resident, so he may continue to live among you. — location: [5608](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5608) ^ref-34661

---
Creditors who monopolize land and take their fellow-citizens as bondservants usurp what belongs to society in trust from the Lord. — location: [5611](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5611) ^ref-63046

---
Biblical laws characterize keeping fellow citizens in servitude or depriving them of the means of self-support as sacrilege. — location: [5612](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5612) ^ref-23214

---
The Book of the Covenant in Exodus, the Priestly Laws of Deuteronomy and the Holiness Code of Leviticus retain the central element of Bronze Age royal proclamations: periodic renewal of liberty from debt and the reversal of resulting land forfeitures. — location: [5620](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5620) ^ref-64200

---
Interest-bearing debt leads to a polarization of wealth. In antiquity it led to a shift in land ownership away from cultivators growing their own food crops to absentee owners assembling vast estates by “joining field to field till no space is left and you live alone in the land” (Isaiah 5. 8). Cultivation on these latifundia shifted to export crops, headed by wine and olive oil, produced increasingly by servile labor. — location: [5626](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5626) ^ref-11204

---
You demanded security from your brothers for no reason; you stripped men of their clothing, leaving them naked. You gave no water to the weary and you withheld food from the hungry, though you were a powerful man owning land – an honored man, living on it. — location: [5647](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5647) ^ref-52547

---
The prophets explained what the Lord did not tell Job: It was not individuals but entire nations that would be punished for breaking the Lord’s covenant and permitting the rich to victimize the poor. That is why society and its religion had to prevent the arrogant hubris of wealth. — location: [5669](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5669) ^ref-36386

---
The evil conceits of their minds know no limits. They scoff and speak with malice; in their arrogance they threaten oppression. — location: [5677](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5677) ^ref-58894

---
Their mouths lay claim to heaven, and their tongues take possession of the earth. … That is what the wicked are like – always carefree, they increase in wealth. — location: [5679](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5679) ^ref-9293

---
“Those who forsake the law praise the wicked, but those who keep the law resist them” — location: [5684](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5684) ^ref-64118

---
with the redemption of rural land by the seller or his relatives, to say nothing of returning it in a Jubilee Year. — location: [5755](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5755) ^ref-3593

---
The fact that Hillel could establish the prosbul waiver as part of rabbinical orthodoxy showed how far Judaism was swept up in the tide of privatization and debt. — location: [5772](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5772) ^ref-35889

---
Roman law made debt obligations sacrosanct, not their cancellation. — location: [5774](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5774) ^ref-41264

---
The practice of releasing bondservants and land from the hands of creditors gave way to debt foreclosure being made irreversible and the loss of status permanent. — location: [5774](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5774) ^ref-36472

---
Having polarized and dried up the agrarian economy at home, Rome became a confederacy of wealthy families feeding on the Levantine economies. — location: [5778](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5778) ^ref-58140

---
Displacing indebted cultivators from their lands actually helped fill the ranks of the imperial legions. — location: [5780](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5780) ^ref-40006

---
Of all the major Biblical laws, this most radical one – that the Lord owns the land, not private appropriators – was the first to be cast aside. — location: [5783](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5783) ^ref-23840

---
obedience paid to the Jubilee year debt forgiveness remained strong enough as late as 12th-century AD Spain to inspire Maimonides and Ibn Adret to insist that without the prosbul waiver, debts among Jews were to be forgiven.[581] — location: [5789](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5789) ^ref-11771

---
“The pre-exilic prophets had not been concerned with salvation for the individual,” writes Cyrus Gordon, “but rather for the nation.”[583] — location: [5800](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5800) ^ref-63071

---
Coronation and New Year festivals were stripped of their Bronze Age association with economic renewal and debt amnesty. The New Year degenerated into a Roman Saturnalia, keeping the ritual drunkenness and disorder but dropping any ensuing restoration of economic balance and equity by freeing society from agrarian and personal debt. — location: [5831](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5831) ^ref-13813

---
lending is represented as the characteristic test for admission to heaven. It is the most prevalent mode of exerting either generosity or coercive power toward one’s fellow beings. — location: [5894](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5894) ^ref-8253

---
Jesus drove home the conflict between his religious values and those of creditors. — location: [5896](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5896) ^ref-19933

---
The law applicable to creditors accordingly is the Eighth Commandment: Thou shalt not steal. Usurers were stealing the land and liberty of the Israelites. The people would suffer national perdition if they failed to heed the Lord’s spirit and rectify matters. — location: [5910](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5910) ^ref-30991

---
Christianity turned the spirit of righteousness into one of charity – by those who had accumulated wealth that, from the archaic perspective, was gained inequitably in the first place. — location: [5921](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5921) ^ref-58423

---
You cannot serve both God and Money [Mammon].” — location: [5938](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5938) ^ref-39331

---
People who want to get rich fall into the temptation and a trap and into many foolish and harmful desires that plunge men into ruin and destruction. For the love of money is a root of all kinds of evil. — location: [5942](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5942) ^ref-63855

---
They enjoyed all nature in partnership … But avarice broke in upon a condition so happily ordained, and, by its eagerness to lay something away and to turn it to its own private use, made all things the property of others, and reduced itself from boundless wealth to straitened need. — location: [5960](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5960) ^ref-27819

---
Not yet had the miser, by hiding away what lay before him, shut off his neighbor from even the necessaries of life; each cared as much for his neighbor as for himself. — location: [5966](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5966) ^ref-62435

---
In order to enslave the many, the greedy began to appropriate and accumulate the necessities of life and kept them tightly shut up, so that they might keep these bounties for themselves. — location: [5972](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5972) ^ref-42159

---
In the name of justice they made unfair and unjust laws to sanction their thefts and avarice against the power of the multitude. In this way they availed as much by authority as by strength of arms or overt evil. — location: [5974](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=5974) ^ref-50645

---
Now listen, you rich people, weep and wail because of the misery that is coming upon you. Your wealth has rotted, and moths have eaten your clothes. Your gold and silver are corroded. Their corrosion will testify against you and eat your flesh like fire. — location: [6011](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6011) ^ref-25877

---
“Babylon,” a metaphor for “merchants of the earth [growing] rich from her excessive luxuries. — location: [6021](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6021) ^ref-11672

---
in contrast to the Jewish Bible and its prophets seeking to end poverty, the New Testament “elevates the spirit of poverty to a value in its own right. — location: [6034](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6034) ^ref-64624

---
The debt write-offs that once stood at the core of social renewal and religious ethics have long been all but unthinkable. — location: [6038](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6038) ^ref-26313

---
Today’s theology lacks the Biblical idea of liberty in the sense of Hebrew deror and its Near Eastern antecedents – liberty from unpayably high debts and monopolization of land. — location: [6040](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6040) ^ref-28145

---
“Before ‘forgiveness’ can find its way back into the lexicon of liberation, it must be linked to justice,” specifically to the concept of economic equity found in the Jubilee tradition. — location: [6045](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6045) ^ref-16859

---
Jesus would find the domestic and international debt burden to pose a moral test of self-centeredness versus openheartedness, Mammon versus God. — location: [6050](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6050) ^ref-60229

---
most of today’s debts have no counterpart in creating mutual gain between borrower and lender, but constitute parasitic usury, a form of theft. — location: [6051](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6051) ^ref-31227

---
Officials were notorious for taking the land of smallholders and keeping the crop surplus for themselves at the expense of central authority. — location: [6087](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6087) ^ref-31041

---
The oligarchic response was to gain control of the fiscal bureaucracy and weaken central oversight authority. The dynamic is age-old. — location: [6303](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6303) ^ref-62100

---
In the East Roman Empire, neither the people nor the Emperor had the last word. The true masters of the Empire were the officials acting in collusion with the dynatoi.”[630] — location: [6318](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6318) ^ref-17295

---
“The majority of the powerful have not abstained from transactions most ruinous to the poor,” — location: [6325](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6325) ^ref-12146

---
“it seldom happens that a great proprietor is a great improver.”[652] — location: [6485](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6485) ^ref-54891

---
while the great majority were being plundered and stripped, the imperial treasury enjoyed not a penny of the profits built up from these embezzlements, for the rivers of money were being diverted elsewhere.”[653] — location: [6487](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6487) ^ref-12132

---
What formerly had been paid as taxes was privatized as land rent. — location: [6539](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6539) ^ref-1248

---
“the army swallowed up the resources of the Empire. The people were crushed by intolerable burdens” while the great estates expanded, particularly those of the laity.”[668] — location: [6564](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6564) ^ref-62102

---
The Venetians took half, and the Crusaders used their share to pay their own debts – and then decided to plunder Constantinople. — location: [6585](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6585) ^ref-17094

---
Isaac Comnenus and his successors had not found a way to field an army and promote prosperity without strengthening the landholding nobility to overpower imperial control. — location: [6589](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6589) ^ref-60403

---
Ultimately at issue was who would manage the economy, and in whose interests. — location: [6614](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6614) ^ref-8631

---
Most fortunes throughout history have been obtained by appropriating the public domain and other land by military seizure, insider dealing, foreclosure by creditors, or purchase at distress prices – followed by a shedding of tax obligations. — location: [6623](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6623) ^ref-27671

---
appropriation of land and natural resources reaches a high enough degree to enable the expropriators to become the de facto government. — location: [6625](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6625) ^ref-44166

---
Acceptance of a polarizing status quo and weakening fiscal position is abetted by civic religion or secular ideology defending any given distribution of land and financial wealth as being a result of nature (or “the market”). — location: [6626](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6626) ^ref-8054

---
No matter how unequal this distribution of wealth becomes, the alternative is said to be anarchy and collapse – as if the main cause of systemic collapse throughout most recorded history has not actually been over-indebtedness and the transfer of land to large appropriators. — location: [6628](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6628) ^ref-13614

---
Opposition to government policies to limit the concentration of wealth promotes an unhistorical and hence unwarranted political surrender to the status quo. — location: [6642](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6642) ^ref-16615

---
This rationalization of an inequitable status quo has no room to acknowledge the historical success of policies that have deterred inequality from developing to the point of impoverishing the poor, or that have reversed such polarization when it does develop. — location: [6644](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6644) ^ref-61873

---
The task of Athenian democracy, and later of Byzantine imperial Novels, was to prevent oligarchic polarization. — location: [6651](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6651) ^ref-62872

---
sees state authority and power as emerging from the Neolithic agricultural revolution only in a despotic way as taxer and oppressor. This one-sided view of the state fails to recognize how Hammurabi’s Babylonian dynasty and his contemporaries enabled their citizen armies to remain self-supporting on the land, free from bondage – and much later, how the 9th- and 10th-century Byzantine emperors likewise preserved village self-support land in the hands of a tax-paying peasant army. — location: [6657](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6657) ^ref-35734

---
throughout the Bronze Age, as long as citizens could obtain their basic needs and self-support, they do not seem to have protested immense wealth at the top. Stability was promoted by continually restoring the “normal” condition where everyone could be self-sustaining on their land, free from bondage. — location: [6662](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6662) ^ref-54170

---
A blind spot when it comes to recognizing the linkage between debt writedowns and freedom is widely shared today. — location: [6674](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6674) ^ref-23042

---
Eleutheria and libertas signified freedom from bondage, but not liberation from liability to creditors. A rising proportion of the Greek and Roman populations lost this liberty without hope of any authority liberating them. That is why, as Finley noted, the great political cry throughout antiquity was for debt cancellations and land redistribution. — location: [6679](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6679) ^ref-57733

---
Memory of Greece’s 7th-century BC populist “tyrants” inspired the tradition of civic officials in some cities being obliged to swear that they would not cancel the debts. — location: [6685](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6685) ^ref-2342

---
Arnold Toynbee described Rome’s patrician idea of “freedom” or “liberty” as limited to oligarchic freedom from kings or civic bodies powerful enough to check creditor power to indebt and impoverish the citizenry at large. — location: [6689](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6689) ^ref-61378

---
Historians who believe that inequality is natural depict freedom and the way to save economies from poverty as being to downsize government. — location: [6696](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6696) ^ref-7150

---
“The state” is an arena in which creditors, landholders and rulers vie for control. History’s eternal tension is between strong rulers and ambitious landlords or creditors over whether to deter or permit (indeed, encourage) inequality, economic polarization and poverty. — location: [6700](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6700) ^ref-63783

---
The central focus of historiography therefore should be policy choices regarding debt, taxation and land tenure. — location: [6702](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6702) ^ref-58406

---
the role of creditors in creating property as our modern epoch knows it – land freely alienable, increasingly stripped of the fiscal obligations that underlay archaic land tenure. — location: [6740](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6740) ^ref-35179

---
Land rights were privatized by being financialized. Creditors sought “freedom” to foreclose or otherwise obtain crop or land rights, overriding the right of citizens to self-support land along with the palace’s fiscal claims for labor services and crop payments. — location: [6750](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6750) ^ref-16923

---
world.  The 16th to 18th centuries saw a series of Enclosure Movements privatize England’s Commons by legal stealth and political insider dealing. Today the World Bank is facilitating a modern Enclosure Movement by promoting land registries in Third World and post-Soviet countries. — location: [6765](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6765) ^ref-44517

---
The security of credit finds its counterpart in the insecurity of land tenure for the indebted population at large. — location: [6768](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6768) ^ref-55837

---
Giving squatters in villages or urban slums legal title is a precondition for stripping them of their customary rights. — location: [6772](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6772) ^ref-48918

---
Privatizing credit in classical Greece and Rome, Judah and Israel, led to privatization of the land by wealthy absentee owners. To retain control over the land’s tax yield and labor services, strong rulers sought to reverse such transfers. — location: [6784](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6784) ^ref-64891

---
The right of citizens to self-support on the land was replaced by its opposite principle – the right of creditors to foreclose, or buyers with money to buy land irreversibly. — location: [6786](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6786) ^ref-44364

---
curbs on creditors are characterized as a despotic repression of individualism, without recognizing just how despotic creditor control of economies becomes in disabling protection of debtors. — location: [6799](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6799) ^ref-65478

---
The individualistic “barter” approach imagines that money emerged simply as a commodity being traded by individuals acting on their own. — location: [6820](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6820) ^ref-36207

---
The time gap between planting and harvesting, or embarking and returning from trade ventures, required agricultural and mercantile debt. — location: [6828](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6828) ^ref-21278

---
The origins of money thus lay in fiscal arrangements with the palace, not in barter or trade among isolated individuals. — location: [6841](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6841) ^ref-4216

---
When Sparta’s kings Agis and Cleomenes tried to cancel debts in the 3rd century BC, local oligarchs called on the Achaean League and Rome to defeat Sparta. — location: [6852](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6852) ^ref-33994

---
Stoic philosophers blamed debt for the collapse of the Republic, and grew sentimental for the Bronze Age as having been a Golden Age of mutual aid and equity. — location: [6854](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6854) ^ref-54706

---
The modern world retains the Roman legal principle protecting the claims of creditors against the economic solvency of debtors. — location: [6856](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6856) ^ref-4855

---
the long sweep of history shows a universal principle to be at work: The burden of debt tends to exceed the ability of debtors to pay. This has been the major cause of economic polarization from antiquity to modern times. Yet today’s popular ideology blames debtors, as if when their arrears are a personal choice rather than stemming from economic strains that compel them to run up debts simply to survive. — location: [6867](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6867) ^ref-62604

---
To insist that all debts must be paid ignores the contrast between the thousands of years of successful Near Eastern clean slates and the debt bondage into which Greco-Roman antiquity sank. — location: [6882](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6882) ^ref-14681

---
When I recently gave a lecture at a theological seminary, some professors informed me that they had gone through divinity school without learning about how central the role of debt was in the Jewish Bible and Jesus’s teachings from his first sermon to his parables. — location: [6889](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=6889) ^ref-21495

---
Islam picked up Christianity’s emphasis on charity. The Koran’s prohibition of interest (2.276) “stands between verses dealing with almsgiving.” Not charging interest was like a charitable gift to the borrower. — location: [10674](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B07QGFZ7DW&location=10674) ^ref-12560

---
