---
kindle-sync:
  bookId: '18023'
  title: 'Restating Orientalism: A Critique of Modern Knowledge'
  author: Wael Hallaq
  asin: B077XKXHPK
  lastAnnotatedDate: '2021-03-27'
  bookImageUrl: 'https://m.media-amazon.com/images/I/91zAISsJGcL._SY160.jpg'
  highlightsCount: 11
---
# Restating Orientalism
## Metadata
* Author: [Wael Hallaq](https://www.amazon.comundefined)
* ASIN: B077XKXHPK
* ISBN: 0231187629
* Reference: https://www.amazon.com/dp/B077XKXHPK
* [Kindle link](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B077XKXHPK)

## Highlights
the obfuscation of the unique relationship between knowledge and power in modernity is itself a function of the discursive formations and not just intellectual shallowness. — location: [402](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B077XKXHPK&location=402) ^ref-60558

---
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries gradually produced particular and unprecedented kinds of knowledge that indeed made themselves substantively and inherently amenable to the manipulation of power, giving the latter its distinctive and complex meaning. — location: [442](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B077XKXHPK&location=442) ^ref-58342

---
colonialism as a concrete manifestation of the knowledge that Europe produced, — location: [451](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B077XKXHPK&location=451) ^ref-55178

---
colonialism, engaged in an extensive, intensive, and circular dialectic with a single-minded formation of Orientalist knowledge in particular and academic knowledge in general, — location: [471](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B077XKXHPK&location=471) ^ref-7874

---
it was these colonialist experiences that allowed Europeans to construct modes of production and methods of governmentality that they would in turn bring back home, cultivate further, refine, and then export again to the colonies. — location: [505](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B077XKXHPK&location=505) ^ref-2400

---
unmasking a universalist vice that was touted as global virtue. — location: [544](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B077XKXHPK&location=544) ^ref-55000

---
the question of where this particular form of imperialism, colonialism, and Orientalism came from. The “Oriental” Other cannot be granted an active agency, for to do so is in effect to argue for the Other’s colonizability. — location: [552](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B077XKXHPK&location=552) ^ref-22458

---
colonialism as sovereign knowledge generated by Orientalism with the support of European academic learning in general is situated within a larger dialectic in which the political projects of conquest and modern knowledge stand within still larger formations whose foundations are firmly anchored in a particular view of nature. — location: [561](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B077XKXHPK&location=561) ^ref-33692

---
Through the prism of the company and corporation, and more generally of corporate institutions (a constant and persistent theme in this book), I argue not only that academic units partake in an underlying structure of thought that is inherently colonialist but also that they are enmeshed, like all corporate bodies, within a larger condition of collective sociopathology. — location: [613](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B077XKXHPK&location=613) ^ref-45076

---
academic units of the central domain are connected, however unconsciously, in structural and structured ways to the colonialist project of Western modernity (now proliferating to the rest of the world). — location: [616](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B077XKXHPK&location=616) ^ref-5110

---
The intention here is to open up critical space for a scrutiny of the entire range of modern academia, leaving no escape route for even the fine arts and other aesthetic endeavors, however less incriminated these are in the violent and destructive projects of modernity. — location: [636](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B077XKXHPK&location=636) ^ref-9224

---
